Mr. MITCHELL .
Mr. President , following the conclusion of morning business at 3:30 p.m. , I will seek unanimous consent to proceed to the consideration of calendar item No .
427 , that Is S. 1630 , the clean air legislation .
THE SENATE AGENDA Mr. MITCHELL .
Mr. President , we begin this session with the Clean Air Act .
This is critical legislation .
It has been over 12 years since the Clean Air Act was last debated in the Senate .
Since then , our population has grown , automobile use Increased , and the economy expanded , with the accompanying increases in production facilities , energy use , congestion , and inevitably , pollution .
These factors have overwhelmed our efforts to improve air quality In the places where the majority of Americans live and work .
Today , more than half the American people are forced to breathe air that does not meet national health standards .
This will be a substantive debate and , on some issues , a controversial one .
Air quality issues vary by region .
Some regions are at significantly greater risk from the effects of acid rain ; some rural areas do not suffer as much from ozone as cities ; congested urban areas are seeing a further degradation in air quality .
I welcome the President 's strong call for action on a Clean Air Act .
I commend him for it .
It is my intention that the Senate give him a strong Clean Air Act .
There are many aspects to this issue .
One overrides all others .
We must protect the health of Americans .
We will , as we should , debate the costs of this bill .
In that regard , I emphasize two points .
First , if measured solely in dollars and cents , this bill should pass because the cost of inaction is higher than the cost of action .
It costs the United States more in health care and lost productivity than it would to clean up air pollution .
This 0 This `` bullet '' symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor .
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD-SENATE bill will save the American people money .
Second , the bill ought not be measured solely in dollars and cents .
That would exclude consideration of the most important of our values-human values .
The evidence is clear , compelling and undisputed that air pollution causes thousands of premature deaths and millions of illnesses each year .
Especially vulnerable are children .
I ask each Senator , what Is the dollar value of a human life ?
What is the dollar value of a child 's health ?
Your child 's health ?
Obviously , these are unanswerable questions .
But just because we ca n't put a dollar value on a child 's health does n't mean we should exclude the health of American children from this debate .
To the contrary , it is and should be central to this debate .
We should get in perspective and keep in perspective the fact that we are considering a health bill .
Its purpose is basic : To make the air we must all breathe fit for human lungs .
Beyond the Clean Air Act , this 2d session of the 101st Congress will be busy .
We have unfinished business from the first session to complete , important reauthorizations to write , a dramatically different world against which to weigh our Nation 's security needs and priorities , as well as the required budget and appropriations measures for 1991 .
I hope conferees on the unfinished business of the first session , drug treatment legislation and oilspill liability , will act promptly .
These are important matters we should be able to finish swiftly .
Tomorrow , the House will override the President 's veto of legislation extending the visa protections of Chinese students and exchange scholars .
It is my intention to ask the Senate to move promptly to that proposal .
I regret the President 's veto of this bill .
His claim that he is doing as much through a Presidential memorandum of disapproval as the bill would do through the law is unpersuasive .
The President 's memorandum of disapproval is only an administrative action .
It provides no statutory legal protection for the Chinese students .
It can be revoked by the President or the Attorney General at their discretion .
This administrative action could also be challenged because immigration law does not , in general , permit aliens to adjust their status if they apply to do so while they are technically in illegal status .
It is an open question whether the administration has the authority to grant such a generalized waiver of a congressionally mandated stipulation .
The best way to answer that question and to resolve all doubt is to do what Congress did last year : Change the law .
That is why we must now override the veto .
Equally important , the veto sends exactly the wrong signal .
The President says he does not want to isolate the Government of China .
Neither do I .
But to the extent that it is isolated , the Government of China isolated itself .
It isolated itself from its own people and from the community of nations by murdering its own citizens , by denying to those citizens even the most basic of human rights .
Our response to the urgent and well-founded fears of the Chinese students in our country was not taken to isolate anyone : It was an appropriate American response to the victims of murder by government .
I hope my colleagues will repeat their unanimous approval of the bill last year with an equally strong vote to override the veto .
It is the right thing to do .
It is my intention to proceed to the crime legislation on or about February 7 , as provided in the agreement we reached last year .
Senator BIDEN , the chairman of the Judiciary Committee , has proposed a vehicle which incorporates the three uncompleted items of the Bush agenda-another Federal death penalty , habeus corpus reform , and exclusionary rule changes-along with some important additional elements to curb drug money-laundering , the DeConcini assault weapons bill , language to curb the export of assault weapons to drug dealers in Latin America , as well as additional funding for law enforcement personnel and other matters .
I know other Senators have proposals in this field as well .
The most effective direct assistance the Federal Government can provide to States for the purpose of curbing violent crime is additional resources for law enforcement , prosecution , and detention .
We made a good start on financing that assistance last year .
I hope the President 's budget for 1991 builds on that beginning .
Following passage of clean air legislation , we will consider national service legislation .
The national 3ervice concept seeks to reinstate at a national level the sense of community , participation , and self-help that are all part of the American tradition .
National service will give our young people an opportunity to use their energy and ideals to help the larger society .
It can give an alternative to that half of our young people who do not go to college .
It will give them a way to make a contribution and , at the same time , earn a stake in their own education or their first home .
For the many young people who know that their desire to attend college poses an enormous financial sacrifice to their parents , national service can be a way to help themselves , by earning their tuition costs in advance of school , rather than graduating with an enormous debt load .
Most important , national service will show young people in very direct and practical terms that their efforts , their talents and their ideals are valued by their society and needed by many millions of their fellow citizens .
The bill we will debate includes a voluntary service component , a conservation component , and a pilot program for the core idea of national service in exchange for education or home ownership credits .
It is my intention also to move promptly to address the Nation 's key education needs .
Our higher education system is among the finest in the world .
But half our students do not go on to higher education .
The education crisis is not at the college level ; it is at the elementary and secondary levels , where the basic foundations of literacy , mathematical skills , and learning skills are established .
We will debate the Educational Excellence Act , which contains the President 's proposals to give awards to schools and teachers for excellence , encourage Innovative teaching methods , and reduce student loan defaults .
I also want to consider the National Literacy Act , which is designed to eliminate illiteracy in this Nation by the year 2000 .
No single action is more critical to our future economic security .
By the end of the century , adequate literacy will be an essential precondition to living in our society .
Only 14 percent of the jobs available then will be adequately performed by high school graduates .
Most Jobs will need higher skills .
Brt 80 percent of new job seekers at that time will be minorities , immigrants , and women .
If we have not substantially improved our literacy levels by that time , we risk seeing those jobs exported overseas .
For the last decade , we have read reports and analyses of the shortcomings in basic educational achievement in our country .
It is time to act on what we know , both as to shortcomings and the best way to correct them .
We know that a third of our math and science teachers today are unqualified to teach in those subjects ; we know we face a shortfall of teachers in the next decade that could reach 2 million , we know American children score consistently lower on math and science tests than children from Asian and European countries .
We know reading and writing skills need substantial improvement .
We also know that early intervention and focused resources help .
We know that extra help to the disadvantaged in elementary schools raises educational achievement levels in high January 23 , 1990 January 23 , 1990 CO schools ; we know Head Start and other enrichment programs bring gains that continue through a child 's school life .
This year , it is time to put what we know Is needed together with what we know will make a difference , and get our school system back on track .
After a decade of reports and rhetoric , Americans expect action and I think we should provide It .
Americans also expect action on child care legislation .
I hope the differences there can be worked out shortly so that a final form of this bill can be voted upon and sent to the President .
Working parents need affordable care for their children but they also want quality care .
The Congress should pass a bill to ensure both .
Those immediate concerns-clean air , national service , crime legislation , and education reform measures-are a good start for our work this year .
But they do not exhaust our agenda .
One issue of particular importance to all of us is campaign finance reform .
It is evident that if we do not reform the manner in which election campaigns are financed , we will forfeit the trust of the American people .
The enormous costs of campaigning are making it more and more difficult for any other than the very wealthy to contemplate serving in the Congress .
The demands of election campaigns force far too much attention to be paid to fundraising activities .
The appearance is one that undermines confidence in Congress .
The reality is one that distorts Congress ' ability to function .
Campaign finance reform is a goal I have pursued for 8 years .
I shall continue to press for It , and I hope that this year we will finally see an opportunity to take effective action .
THE RETIREMENT OF MAX BARBER Mr. MITCHELL .
Mr. President , I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the recent retirement of Max Barber , who served as superintendent of the Senate Radio-TV Gallery .
Max has been a familiar face in the U.S. Capitol for 38 years .
During those years , Max worked as an elevator opertor , served on the Capitol Police Force , and most recently was the superintendent of the Senate Radio-TV Gallery , where for 17 years he assisted our friends in the broadcast media .
Max was privileged to witness many changes that have occurred in the Congress .
I was privileged to have his support and assistance during my first year as majority leader .
Shortly before the holidays , Max announced his retirement .
I understand that he and his wife , Sylvia , are now enjoying the sunny skies of Florida for NGRESSIONAL RECORD-SENATE the winter months .
On behalf of all my colleagues in Congress , I wish Max and Sylvia a most happy and healthy retirement .
He will be missed .
I also want to take this opportunity to extend to his successor , Larry Janezich , the very best wishes in his new role .
I know he is up to the task .
AN ENVIRONMENTAL DIVIDEND : CAPITALIZING ON NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR INTERNATIONAL ACTION Mr. MITCHELL .
Mr. President , I ask unanimous consent that a speech given by the distinguished chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , Senator CLAIBORNE PELL of Rhode Island , be inserted in the RECORD .
The honorable chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee recently addressed the Global Forum on Environment and Development for Survival in Moscow .
His remarks focus on the catastrophic threats to the world 's environment-including global climate change , ozone depletion and a host of problems that require international cooperation .
I would like to call this important speech to the attention of my colleagues .
Not only does it deal with one of the most significant problems of our times , it does so with eloquence and clarity .
I hope other Senators will take the time to review Senator PELL 'S statement .
There being no objection , the remarks werc ordered to be printed in the RECORD , as follows : AN ENVIRONMENTAL DIVIDEND : CAPITALIZING ON NEw OPPORTUNITIES FOR INTERNATIONAL AcTION ( Remarks by Senator Claiborne Pell , Global Forum on Environment and Development , Moscow , U.S.S.R. , January 17 , 1990 ) We are gathered here at an extraordinary time in human history .
In a matter of months a series of popular movements have transformed Europe .
The Iron Curtain has ceased to be a barrier between East and West .
A democratically elected government has taken power in Poland , and in the next few months free elcdtions will be held in East Germany , Czechoslovakia , Bulgaria , Hungary , and Romania .
In addition , the Soviet Union is well along on a path to freedom , openness and democratic renewal .
With the changes in Eastern Europe and the Soviet U nion , East and West will begin to share common values of a belief in individual rights and democratic institutions .
The wave of democracy is also spreading to the developing world .
With the recent elections in Chile , every government in South America will be a democracy .
Elsewhere In the just concluded decade , dictatorships in the Philippines and Pakistan have disappeared and India 's recent elections , the largest exercise of popular choice in human history , reminds us of the appeal of democracy to even the world 's poorest people .
Of course , there are setbacks , as last June 's events in Tiananmen Square remind us , and democracy can be fragile as witnessed by recent events in Manila .
Of the overall trend , however , we can be optimistic : democracy Is indeed on the march .
It is an interesting fact that modern history has never known a war between democratic states .
And , Indeed , the spread of democracy and freedom across Europe has resulted In a dramatic reduction of tensions .
In 1981 , the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists advanced the clock of global survival to three minutes before the midnight of nuclear Armageddon .
Today with a treaty on Intermediate Nuclear Forces In place and agreements for drastic reductions in strategic and conventional forces in the offing , we can see the hands of that clock being set further back .
We in the United States consider the European democracies to be our friends and allies .
Looking ahead we might ask whether democratic nations in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union might also be our friends and allies , and if so , for what threat do we need anything comparable to our existing level of armaments ?
A more peaceful world does not translate into a problem-free world .
Indeed , as the threat of nuclear incineration recedes , we can see more clearly the danger posed by environmental degradation and global climate change .
As nuclear winter would suddenly alter man 's climate and prospects for survival , so might global warming albeit more gradually .
If we do nothing we may be trading the risk of a flash fry for the certainty of a slow roasting .
In the end , however , the results can be comparably catastrophic .
If a deteriorating environment is comparable in consequence , if not immediacy , to global war , then logically it requires a comparable response .
Put simply , we must be prepared to come forward with the resources to protect our environment .
Today my country spends $ 295.6 billion on defense and $ 5.6 billion at the federal level , or about one-fifteenth as much , on protecting our environment .
It is not realistic to expect these proportions to be reversed , but they must be changed .
The end of the Cold War is already leading to cuts in military spending .
This trend should be accelerated as we conclude agreements to reduce strategic and conventional arms .
These will jave substantial money for both the countries of NATO and those linked to the Warsaw Pact .
We have successfully met the challenge of the Cold War .
The question now is how will we meet the challenge of peace ?
Here I would suggest that a meaningful percentage , perhaps 15 percent , of our prospective peace dividend be dedicated to the environment .
And I would propose that the upcoming agreements on strategic and conventional forces explicitly earmark 15 percent of the resultant savings for additional environmental protection to be expended either within the country where the savings are made or internationally .
Under the domestic law of the United States such funds would have to be appropriated pursuant to our constitutional processes .
I am sure the same would be true for other countries that would participate in such an agreement .
However , the inclusion of an environmental peace dividend in an arms control treaty will create an obligation and a goal for both West and East .
It would also set an important precedent for future East-West agreements , one where we agree not only on measures to reduce the risk of mutual destruction but also on major measures of mutual cooperation .
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD-SENATE January 23 , 1990 I would further propose that we direct the earmarked environmental expenditure largely to those problems which are international or global in nature .
In Europe this would mean spending to clean up shared rivers , to prevent air pollution which in Europe has no boundaries , and to neutralize acid rain which is destroying the forests , lakes , and monuments of Europe .
It is no secret that the countries of Eastern Europe have lagged far behind Western Europe In utilizing pollution control tech .
nologies in their manufacturing and power generation processes .
Partly this results from antiquated plants , partly from economic distress that necessitates use of polluting technologies and fuels , such as high sulfur coal , and partly it is the product of a political system in which the ruling elite was not responsive to the concerns of the population .
Whatever the reason , however , the victims of East European pollution live in both the Eastern and Western wings of the common European home .
Both wings will benefit from cleaning up the environment .
However , it follows that a very large part of the European generated component of my proposed environmental peace dividend should be channeled to Eastern Europe .
In the case of the United States and Canada , our people will undoubtedly expect that the greater part of our peace dividend be spent in a manner that visibly benefits our own people .
Thus , most of our two countries ' new environmental expenditure should occur on our North American continent .
This expenditure should nonetheless be made in a way that benefits the global environment .
North Americans are both in the aggregate and on a per capita basis the biggest producers of the greenhouse gases , and In particular of carbon dioxide .
Logically , the effort to begin to control global warming must start In North America .
Under my proposed scheme I would recommend that a great part of our environmental dividend be used to develop energy conservation technologies as well as alternatives to fossil fuels .
As a bonus , this effort will help ameliorate the problem of acid rain , which has become a major bilateral issue in U.S.-Canada relations and has inflicted damage on my home region of New England .
At this time I can not state the amount of new environmental expenditure to be generated by my proposal .
However , some project that the end of the Cold War might lead to a 50 percent reduction in U.S. defense spending by the end of this century .
If 15 percent of this saving went to the environmental peace dividend , the annual new environmental expenditure in the United States would equal $ 22 billion , or four times our present federal effort .
Comparable sums should be generated by reductions in European and Soviet defense expenditure .
With this level of resource commitment we might truly begin to have an impact on the mammoth environmental problems facing us .
So far I have discussed how the peace dividend generated by the end of the Cold War might be used to enhance the environment of the Cold Warring nations , that Is , of Europe and North America .
We live in a single global community .
The Spring cleaning made possible by the thaw In the Cold War will benefit not only our house but also our global community .
However , we can not be indifferent to an environmental deterioration in that part of the world which is neither East nor West , that is , the Third World , the developing world which is home to 70 percent of the world 's population .
On an environmental level , we will accomplish little if the savings in greenhouse gases made by conservation and new technology use In the developed countries are offset by the ecologically unsound Industrialization of the developing world and by the destruction of the tropical forests which are quite literally the lungs of our planet .
Worse , environmental degradation in the third world is the product of , the companion of , and the cause of increased poverty and human misery .
This misery can only breed popular anger and governmental instability .
It could harm the process of democratization in the third world and lead to the emergence of aggressive regimes .
It would be truly tragic if the end of the Cold War were followed by new wars in the developing world or growing conflict along northsouth , rich-poor lines .
Given the consequences , our response to environmental deterioration in the third world is woefully inadequate .
Until recently , the principal development banks and major donors did not include the environment as priority in the development process .
Indeed , many donor-financed projects went forward without regard to the environmental consequences with sometimes disastrous consequences .
It was only in 1972 that the international community established an organization specifically concerned with the global environment .
That organization , the United Nations Environment Program , remains stunningly underfunded .
In 1989 the UNEP budget was a mere $ 30 million , not even one percent of U.S. environmental expenditure at the federal level .
In its 17 years UNEP has had an extraordinary catalytic role in developing international environmental law , in assisting developing countries build environmental institutions , and in enhancing an awareness of the close link between the environment and development .
Among UNEP 's recent achievements is the Montreal Protocol on the ozone layer , the major international environmental agreement of the decade and the first serious effort to address the global warming problem .
This alone would , In my view , justify the paltry sums our world community has expended on UNEP .
I believe we should in this decade resolve to support a rapid increase in the size and scope of UNEP activities .
I would urge a tenfold expansion in the UNEP budget over the next three years .
This , of course , will require leadership from the parliamentarians amongst us to Increase our own countries ' contributions .
However , even at the $ 300 million level , UNEP would still be a modest sized U.N. agency , and the overall effort would be still small as compared to the environmental needs of the developing world or the scale of the global environmental problem .
As you will have noticed my remarks have focused heavily on the Issue of resources .
After a decade of borrowing and spending , it has become fashionable in the United States to talk of actions that do not cost money .
Given the economic crisis of the East , they too may be subject to the same tendency .
And there is , of course , much that can be done to protect the environment without costing a lot of money .
However , we can not seriously address our environmental crisis unless we are also prepared to address the need for major new resources .
Hence the Importance I have given to means for finding such resources .
As a planet we face a threat to our survival comparable to the threat a foreign enemy can pose to national survival .
New ideas and cost-free measures have their place .
There is , however , no substitute for cold , hard cash .
Fortunately , the prospective peace dividend provides a source for such cash .
This said , I would like to put in a word on behalf of several relatively low cost environmental Initiatives with which I personally have long been associated .
On several occasions I have persuaded my Senate colleagues to endorse resolutions containing draft treaty language .
I am pleased to say that two of these efforts were , In fact , converted from Senate resolution into an actual treaty now In force .
These are a treaty banning tile emplacement of weapons of mass destruction on the seabed floor and a treaty banning the use of environmental modification techinques In warfare .
In 1977 I put forward draft language for a third treaty , an international agreement mandating the preparation of an environmental impact assessment for all projects , public and private , that would impact on the territory of another state or on the global commons .
My proposed Environmental Impact Assessment Treaty would not prohibit a state from carrying out the activity .
It would , however , be required to make a detailed assessment of the impact of the activity and to communicate this information to the affected countries or , in the case of the global commons , to the United Nations Environment Program .
This idea was endorsed unanimously by the U.S. Senate in 1078 .
Since then it has been on the agenda of the UNEP Governing Council and , as principles to be followed by member states , has received the endorsement of that Governing Council .
Further , UNEP 's international law unit has made substantial progress toward drafting a treaty .
I realize many European agreements go far beyond this treaty .
However , where no such agreements are in place , I believe this Environmental Impact Assessment Treaty represents an important step toward greater environmental responsibility .
Second , I would urge we move forward quickly with proposals to draft and enact an International convention to protect biological diversity .
This , too , is an issue of personal concern and I am proud to be the author of a provision of U.S. law establishing a program , under the auspices of our Agency for International Development , to assist countries in the protection of biological diversity .
With the rate of extinctions rapidly accelerating there can be no doubt of the seriousness of the problem .
Here in the presence of so many spiritual leaders I can only wonder how the divine must view the destruction of so many of His creations .
And I wonder what He must think of the cavalier manner In which these extinctions are being carried out-elephants and rhinos destroyed for ivory trinkets and aphrodisiac powder , or perhaps worse , entire species obliterated without man even knowing what was once there .
A treaty to conserve biological diversity should include provisions under which countries would register species-rich habitats , and in particular , the habitats of endangered species .
Registration of the habitat would include an obligation to protect the habitat , and the species contained therein .
In my view , a treaty should spell out minimum standards for habitat and species protection .
In return for protecting these habitats , the registering countries should receive technical assistance for their protective activities and perhaps a priority for other kinds of assistance Intended to encourage January 23 , 1990 CO local peoples to value the preserved life resources .
Finally , I would note that the last 15 years has seen an enormous explosion in the number and scope of international legal agreements relating to the environment .
The development of international environmental law is a low cost and highly beneficial way of protecting global environment and of enhancing global environmental cooperation .
This Is a trend we must encourage .
I would hope that UNEP 's environmental law unit might become the nucleus of a new International environmental law institute .
Such an institute should draw on the resources of UNEP members , and In particular those with more developed domestic environmental law .
I would hope these states might secund lawyers to the international environmental law institute both for the purpose of developing further international environmental law and to assist countries in the development of domestic environmental law .
Twenty-five years ago , in his last speech to the United Nations , U.S .
Ambassador Adlai Stevenson made reference to the photographs of Earth taken from an early space mission .
Today these images have become commonplace but at that time they were strikingly new and they led Ambassador Stevenson to reflect on the fragility of our human environment .
`` We travel together , '' he said , `` passengers on a little space ship , dependent on its vulnerable reserves of air and soil , all committed for our safety to its security and peace ; preserved from annihilation only by the care , the work , and I will say , the love we give our fragile craft .
`` The rapid political changes of the last year now provide an extraordinary opportunity-an opportunity for unprecedented global cooperation and an opportunity to mobilize significant new resources-to the task of protecting our fragile craft .
We must go forward from here reaffirming our love for this planet and rededicating ourselves to its protection .
Mr. MITCHELL .
Mr. President , I would like now to yield to my distinguished friend and colleague , the Republican leader and to say that it is as always a pleasure to be here on the Senate floor with the distinguished Republican leader .
I look forward to what I know will be a busy and I hope will also be a very productive session for the Senate and the Nation .